Add "Modernizing Superseded Typing Features" guide (#1541)
python/typing: docs/source/modernizing.rst

Python 2 and variable annotations before Python 3.6. While most type checkers
still support them, they are considered obsolete, and type checkers are
not required to support them.

For example, replace::

    x = 3  # type: int
    def f(x, y):  # type: (int, int) -> int
        return x + y

with::

    x: int = 3
    def f(x: int, y: int) -> int:
        return x + y

When using forward references or types only available during type checking,
it's necessary to either use :python:`from __future__ import annotations`
(available since Python 3.7) or to quote the type::

    def f(x: "Parrot") -> int: ...

    class Parrot: ...

.. _modernizing-typing-text:

``typing.Text``
===============

*Alternative available since:* Python 3.0

:class:`typing.Text` was a type alias intended for Python 2 compatibility.
It is equivalent to :class:`str` and should be replaced with it.
For example, replace::

    from typing import Text

    def f(x: Text) -> Text: ...

with::

    def f(x: str) -> str: ...

.. _modernizing-typed-dict:

``typing.TypedDict`` Legacy Forms
=================================

*Alternative available since:* Python 3.6

> :class:`TypedDict <typing.TypedDict>` supports two legacy forms for

Reviewer: We can add that the first legacy form is still useful if you have keys that are not valid identifiers.

* :class:`typing.Collection` (→ :class:`collections.abc.Collection`)
* :data:`typing.Callable` (→ :class:`collections.abc.Callable`)
* :class:`typing.AbstractSet` (→ :class:`collections.abc.Set`)
* :class:`typing.MutableSet` (→ :class:`collections.abc.MutableSet`)
* :class:`typing.Mapping` (→ :class:`collections.abc.Mapping`)
* :class:`typing.MutableMapping` (→ :class:`collections.abc.MutableMapping`)
* :class:`typing.Sequence` (→ :class:`collections.abc.Sequence`)
* :class:`typing.MutableSequence` (→ :class:`collections.abc.MutableSequence`)
* :class:`typing.ByteString` (→ :class:`collections.abc.ByteString`), but see :ref:`modernizing-byte-string`
* :class:`typing.MappingView` (→ :class:`collections.abc.MappingView`)
* :class:`typing.KeysView` (→ :class:`collections.abc.KeysView`)
* :class:`typing.ItemsView` (→ :class:`collections.abc.ItemsView`)
* :class:`typing.ValuesView` (→ :class:`collections.abc.ValuesView`)
* :class:`typing.ContextManager` (→ :class:`contextlib.AbstractContextManager`)
* :class:`typing.AsyncContextManager` (→ :class:`contextlib.AbstractAsyncContextManager`)
* :class:`typing.Pattern` (→ :class:`re.Pattern`)
* :class:`typing.Match` (→ :class:`re.Match`)

> The following types were made generic in Python 3.12:

Reviewer: Not sure what change this refers to. It's not generic even on main:

```
% ./python.exe 
Python 3.13.0a2+ (heads/main:16448cab44, Dec  6 2023, 14:43:22) [Clang 14.0.0 (clang-1400.0.29.202)] on darwin
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
>>> from typing import Hashable
>>> Hashable[int]
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
    Hashable[int]
    ~~~~~~~~^^^^^
  File "/Users/jelle/py/cpython/Lib/typing.py", line 378, in inner
    return func(*args, **kwds)
           ~~~~^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
  File "/Users/jelle/py/cpython/Lib/typing.py", line 1423, in __getitem__
    _check_generic(self, params, self._nparams)
    ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
  File "/Users/jelle/py/cpython/Lib/typing.py", line 295, in _check_generic
    raise TypeError(f"{cls} is not a generic class")
TypeError: typing.Hashable is not a generic class
```

    type IntList = list[int]

Code supporting older Python versions should use
:data:`TypeAlias <typing.TypeAlias>`, introduced in Python 3.10, but also
available in typing-extensions, instead::

    from typing import TypeAlias  # or typing_extensions.TypeAlias

    IntList: TypeAlias = list[int]

.. _modernizing-user-generics:

User Defined Generics
=====================

*Alternative available since:* Python 3.12

Python 3.12 introduced new syntax for defining generic classes. Previously,
generic classes had to derive from :class:`typing.Generic` (or another
generic class) and defined the type variable using :class:`typing.TypeVar`.
For example::

    from typing import Generic, TypeVar

    T = TypeVar("T")

    class Brian(Generic[T]): ...
    class Reg(int, Generic[T]): ...

Starting with Python 3.12, the type variable doesn't need to be declared
using ``TypeVar``, and instead of deriving the class from ``Generic``, the
following syntax can be used::

    class Brian[T]: ...
    class Reg[T](int): ...

.. _modernizing-byte-string:

``typing.ByteString``
=====================

*Alternative available since:* Python 3.0; Python 3.12, typing-extensions

> :class:`ByteString <typing.ByteString>` was originally intended to be a type

Reviewer: What exactly this meant is very unclear. This text is probably fine though.

.. role:: python(code)
   :language: python

.. role:: t-ext(class)

.. _modernizing:

**************************************
Modernizing Superseded Typing Features
**************************************

Introduction
============

This guide helps to modernize your code by replacing older typing features
with their modern equivalents. Not all features described here are obsolete,

> but they superseded by more modern alternatives, that are recommended to use.

Reviewer 2: "they superseded" => "they are superseded"

> but they are superseded by more modern alternatives, that are recommended to use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but they are superseded by more modern alternatives, which are recommended to use.
```

These newer features are not available in all Python versions, although
some features are available as backports from the
`typing-extensions <https://pypi.org/project/typing-extensions/>`_
package, or require quoting or using :python:`from __future__ import annotations`.
Each section states the minimum Python version required to use the
feature, whether it is available in typing-extensions, and whether it is
available using quoting.

.. note::

    The latest version of typing-extensions is available for all Python
    versions that have not reached their end of life, but not necessarily for
    older versions.

.. note::

    :python:`from __future__ import annotations` is available since Python 3.7.

>     This will only work inside type annotations, while quoting is still

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This only has an effect inside type annotations, while quoting is still
```

This affects the following types:

* :class:`typing.Deque` (→ :class:`collections.deque`)
* :class:`typing.DefaultDict` (→ :class:`collections.defaultdict`)
* :class:`typing.OrderedDict` (→ :class:`collections.OrderedDict`)
* :class:`typing.Counter` (→ :class:`collections.Counter`)
* :class:`typing.ChainMap` (→ :class:`collections.ChainMap`)
* :class:`typing.Awaitable` (→ :class:`collections.abc.Awaitable`)
* :class:`typing.Coroutine` (→ :class:`collections.abc.Coroutine`)
* :class:`typing.AsyncIterable` (→ :class:`collections.abc.AsyncIterable`)
* :class:`typing.AsyncIterator` (→ :class:`collections.abc.AsyncIterator`)
* :class:`typing.AsyncGenerator` (→ :class:`collections.abc.AsyncGenerator`)
* :class:`typing.Iterable` (→ :class:`collections.abc.Iterable`)
* :class:`typing.Iterator` (→ :class:`collections.abc.Iterator`)
* :class:`typing.Generator` (→ :class:`collections.abc.Generator`)
* :class:`typing.Reversible` (→ :class:`collections.abc.Reversible`)
* :class:`typing.Container` (→ :class:`collections.abc.Container`)
* :class:`typing.Collection` (→ :class:`collections.abc.Collection`)
* :data:`typing.Callable` (→ :class:`collections.abc.Callable`)

> * :class:`typing.AbstractSet` (→ :class:`collections.abc.Set`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* :class:`typing.AbstractSet` (→ :class:`collections.abc.Set`), note the change in name
```

* :class:`typing.MutableSet` (→ :class:`collections.abc.MutableSet`)
* :class:`typing.Mapping` (→ :class:`collections.abc.Mapping`)
* :class:`typing.MutableMapping` (→ :class:`collections.abc.MutableMapping`)
* :class:`typing.Sequence` (→ :class:`collections.abc.Sequence`)
* :class:`typing.MutableSequence` (→ :class:`collections.abc.MutableSequence`)
* :class:`typing.ByteString` (→ :class:`collections.abc.ByteString`), but see :ref:`modernizing-byte-string`
* :class:`typing.MappingView` (→ :class:`collections.abc.MappingView`)
* :class:`typing.KeysView` (→ :class:`collections.abc.KeysView`)
* :class:`typing.ItemsView` (→ :class:`collections.abc.ItemsView`)
* :class:`typing.ValuesView` (→ :class:`collections.abc.ValuesView`)

> * :class:`typing.ContextManager` (→ :class:`contextlib.AbstractContextManager`)
> * :class:`typing.AsyncContextManager` (→ :class:`contextlib.AbstractAsyncContextManager`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* :class:`typing.ContextManager` (→ :class:`contextlib.AbstractContextManager`), note the change in name
* :class:`typing.AsyncContextManager` (→ :class:`contextlib.AbstractAsyncContextManager`), note the change in name
```

.. _modernizing-no-return:

``typing.NoReturn``
===================

*Alternative available since:* Python 3.11, typing-extensions

Python 3.11 introduced :data:`typing.Never` as an alias to
:data:`typing.NoReturn` for use in annotations that are not
return types. For example, replace::

    from typing import NoReturn

    def f(x: int, y: NoReturn) -> None: ...

with::

    from typing import Never  # or typing_extensions.Never

    def f(x: int, y: Never) -> None: ...

But keep ``NoReturn`` for return types::

    from typing import NoReturn

    def f(x: int) -> NoReturn: ...

.. _modernizing-type-aliases:

Type Aliases
============

*Alternative available since:* Python 3.12 (keyword); Python 3.10, typing-extensions

Originally, type aliases were defined using a simple assignment::

    IntList = list[int]

Python 3.12 introduced the :keyword:`type` keyword to define type aliases::

    type IntList = list[int]

Code supporting older Python versions should use
:data:`TypeAlias <typing.TypeAlias>`, introduced in Python 3.10, but also
available in typing-extensions, instead::

    from typing import TypeAlias  # or typing_extensions.TypeAlias

>     IntList: TypeAlias = list[int]

Reviewer 3: This might want to also mention `typing_extensions.TypeAliasType`, which allows providing a name and explicit typevar order. That’s newer and not all checkers support it yet though.

Author: @TeamSpen210 As I'm not terribly familiar with `TypeAliasType` and the new `type` syntax (yet), could you make a suggestion how we can word this?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    IntList: TypeAlias = list[int]
    
There are cases where `TypeAlias` is insufficient to express what you can express
using :keyword:`type`, such as when you want the order of type parameters to
be different from how they appear in the body of the alias.

In this case you can use `typing_extensions.TypeAliasType` to express this alias
in older versions of Python::

    from typing_extensions import TypeAliasType, TypeVar
    
    T = TypeVar("T", infer_variance=True)
    ListOrTuple = TypeAliasType("ListOrTuple", list[T] | tuple[T, ...], type_params=(T, ))
    
This is equivalent to::

    type ListOrTuple[T] = list[T] | tuple[T, ...]
    
Note however that `TypeAliasType` is newer and not yet supported by every type checker.
```

Maybe something like this? I couldn't think of a good example where you'd actually want to change the order of type parameters, but it at least conveys how to use `TypeAliasType` to be equivalent with a `type` keyword.

Author: Thanks, I like your text, but I'd like to see an example where this could be useful. I want this document to be a practical guide, so keeping it concise is one of the goals.

Reviewer 4: That's fair, until mypy supports `TypeAliasType` there might not be much point.

I think there's a potential use-case for using an unbound `TypeVar` as a slightly more strict gradual type compared to `Any`. With the old `TypeAlias` it's not possible to have unbound type params unless you pass them back in explicitly, so that could simplify some code, but pyright does not appear to allow unbound type params inside PEP695 type aliases and just treats it as a type parameter anyways if you ignore the error, so you still have to do it the old way and always pass in the type parameter into the alias to leave it unbound.

To illustrate what I mean:
```
from collections.abc import Callable
from typing import TypeVar

class Foo:
    pass

class Bar(Foo):
    pass

FooT = TypeVar("FooT", infer_variance=True, bound=Foo)

type AcceptsFoo = Callable[[FooT], object]

# I don't have to specify a type param here, because `AcceptsFoo` takes none
def foo(x: AcceptsFoo) -> None:
    return None
    
def accepts_foo(x: Foo) -> None:
    return None
    
def accepts_bar(x: Bar) -> None:
    return None

foo(accepts_foo)
# This would be rejected if FooT was actually bound
# since FooT should be contravariant, but since we
# leave it unbound it behaves like a gradual type
foo(accepts_bar)
# but this will be rejected since `int` is not a subclass of `Foo`
foo(int)
```

I think this is a better use-case than the explicit order of type params, but since there's no type checker support for it yet, I can't really use it as a motivating example.

Reviewer 3: Another reason to use TypeAliasType is for at runtime. Since it's an instance of that type and not just an assignment, using it in type annotations will preserve the alias when introspected.

Reviewer 2: > ...but since there's no type checker support for [using an unbound type variable] yet...

Using a type variable that is not bound to a scope is expressly forbidden (both in PEP 484 and in PEP 695), so this will never be supported.

Reviewer 4: @erictraut That's fair, but if you modify the above example to this:
```python
from collections.abc import Callable
from typing import TypeVar

class Foo:
    pass

class Bar(Foo):
    pass

FooT = TypeVar("FooT", infer_variance=True, bound=Foo)

type AcceptsFoo[FooT] = Callable[[FooT], object]

def foo(x: AcceptsFoo[FooT]) -> None:
    return None
    
def accepts_foo(x: Foo) -> None:
    return None
    
def accepts_bar(x: Bar) -> None:
    return None

foo(accepts_foo)
foo(accepts_bar)
foo(int)
```
It will work without raising any errors (beyond the last line) and will work in the way I described it, even though `FooT` remains unbound in `foo`, since it only appears in the function signature once.

To me both of those cases should be semantically equivalent. Using a singular `TypeVar` in functions is a common trick to achieve a gradual type like `Any` (i.e. it will match in either direction) but that will reject types that don't match the upper bound. But this trick tends to create quite verbose function signatures, which could be avoided if the above were allowed.
